

closer to the target and calmer. You could even say that we wanted to continue the adventure because in Honduras we had no pressure, everything was calm,

src"images/SobrevivSecondHalf-8.jpg"/
Chapter VIII. Honduras

Imminent

In Honduras we could rent a hotel, but we preferred to rent an apartment, because in a hotel we could not cook and we did not have much money. We weren't looking for comfort, but a basic need,

We knew in advance that we should not waste any more time; everything had to be planned correctly, as we had done since we left Brazil. The reason for our urgency was that President Obama's term was going to end soon. We were aware of the news, of the political sacy for power that was being lived in the United States. We mistakenly think that when this president is there, he would give us political asylum without problem and open the doors for our benefit. Nothing further from reality, because the benefit was not for everyone. Obama was one of the presidents who made the most deportations during his tenure. At the time, the elections between the two candidates were very closed and we knew their political tendencies. They knew that if Donald Trump won, things wouldn't turn out in our favor,

When we get to! apartment we rented, we took a bath and saw how to move to buy food. Until that time there were six Haitians. I didn't have a cell phone thanks to the thieves who left me incommunicado. I had to buy one so I could' be in contact with my mother, who cared about me. But first /we had to change, because we already had time in the same clothes and needed to go and buy something new. However, despite what we thought we would do, we relaxed for a few minutes, had some beers and listened, music. We talked about our experiences in. these months. By that time we had. 'already three months of touring,

I had talked about going for a walk, dancing, meeting people and having fun; but because we were so tired and the night was very long, we fell asleep. '

In the morning, when we woke up we had to go in search of a Haitian who had more time there, because for some reason he stayed in the country. They had passed on their data to us, for already many who had crossed knew him. He was the only one who could explain to us how the situation was in the migration offices. We felt some anxiety and didn't want to waste time, but we didn't want to go too fast either. Some Haitians who arrived a week before us took us to a place to buy cheap clothes and cell phones. I wanted to talk to my mom because that day was her birthday, on November 28th. I got $500 for a trip. I managed to join a group so I could buy my cell phone and call my mother to congratulate her,

We went to a market to buy things to cook and you can say we had a pretty nice and relaxed day. At night we were all in a mood, the weather was good and we were going to enjoy that space. It's funny how you learn to enjoy things only in situations like these. When human beings have everything, sometimes they don't enjoy it. However, we every space we had tried to have a good time. We didn't know how many days we were going to stay and we wanted to take things easy, take our time; because after leaving everything changed. We started—with insecurities, with fears, we dealt with all kinds of thoughts and feelings, stress returned and to suffer the same and other needs.

we drank beer in one of the squares, which was badly seen by Hondurans because they don't drink beer on the street, but out of ignorance we did. We didn't know it was forbidden in the country. We had no knowledge of that rule. After a few moments two policemen arrived and asked us to follow them to the delegation and when we arrived they asked us for papers to return to Nicaragua, because what we were doing was illegal. We tried various forms of negotiation. We begged them to let us go, but they wouldn't take the deal,

we told them that if we were to be returned to Nicaragua we would have to start over, but now without money because we no longer had and our family was not in a position to help us. It was a terrible situation and a disgrace to our families if they found out that the police had handcuffed us because of taking in the street. So, we started to see how else we could get rid of and avoid being returned. Within the group was a friend who spoke perfect Spanish, so much so that the inspector was impressed by his fluency. And in the end. the inspector told us that we could leave conditioned; warned us that the next day we should leave the country, . if they were not going to report us to the migration offices for the same situation. They caught us with a cooler full of beer and they had it. Very carefully, before we retired we dared to ask them to continue in the apartment, but they told us no, that those beers had already changed ownership,

When we came to the apartment none of us commented on it, because it was a bad experience, even if for us it was something insignificant. Although we had already scared the way, we feared being returned to Nicaragua, because it is one of the worst countries we're going through. For us it was an unnecessary experience,

in the morning we prepared to leave the country, because of the agreement we made with the police. By eight o'clock in the morning we were already on migration and we were given an appointment for two o'clock in the afternoon. We returned to the house to cook and prepare to leave and at one o'e we return to wait for the truck. It was a special truck, because in some countries that we were going through migration, he advised taxis to charge us twice as much. For us it was no problem because what we wanted was to keep going. When we were in the truck it was 1:30 and it was like three people missing. The driver just didn't feel like waiting for others and when you pay for the ticket and you don't arrive, you lose the money. We talked to the driver, but he wouldn't agree. At least we tried. It really wasn't that important to us. Unfortunately one has to think selfishly and do anything above whoever it is to defend his person and follow the goal. The others stayed and we go on. We wanted to turn the leaf io as fast as possible and continue to leave Honduras, for on second thought, it was not so pleasant to be there,

At the time of the trip, everyone was joking with the impatience to discover another land. In every country we were going to cross fortunately we found a friend, family member or acquaintance who had already gone through that experience. So, they explained to us how we should pass, who we had to pay or if we could pass directly. When we arrived at The Guatemalan border in the early morning, we followed the instructions so that no one would steal our personal things. We knew beforehand that we would meet fake guides, fake taxi drivers, as well as people on the street that we distrusted, because they always wanted to take money from us. Rarely were we lucky not to pay. This time we paid to go to migration, which was in a market,

As  Cubans paid a lot of money to cross the border, abusive guides made them cross a hill to get more money out of them, while we were allowed to cross directly. As we got on the cab that would lead us to the border, the taxi driver told us that we could all cross there. Without much thought, at that time we paid the taxi driver five dollars more to provide us with information. It's amazing how people give so much value to money and where there's money can be corrupted, no time firm lycreated. Very, but very few people gave us anything without asking for anything in return,

The truck had very loud music and as we walked the streets of Guatemala all 'world looked at us, as if they had never seen people of color, or maybe it was what they saw us with admiration, I would like to think it was the second. It was a strange thing that sometimes people when they saw us thought we were Americans and they wanted to speak us in English. Which suggests that they had no idea what kind of migration had reached that border. We looked at the road and realized it looked like the periphery,

"photo">

Chapter IX. Guatemala

StopGuatemala, for us it was one of the fastest trips. When the taxi driver left us in front of the migration offices, we realized that it wasn't really the migration office. Within a public market was an office to receive migrants, in which we obtained a document valid for twenty days, although we were not supposed to stay in the city more than twenty-four hours after obtaining it.while we were waiting for the bus we looked for a bathroom to brush our teeth and a restaurant to eat. We were scrambled with the Cubans, who had also made the route as a group. While we were enlisting, a lady came to offer us coffee. She was a religious lady with a big heart, who then fed us all and made a long, beautiful prayer with us. We sat down and talked to her, it was a blessing. He felt empathy for us, for he let us know that he was aware of the suffering we had gone through, we were passing and we would still pass. It was extremely rare for someone to put the moment in our shoes, no one had done it until that time. It was as if I'd been watching those humiliations we went through. It was so beautiful the feeling. that brought us, to the point that we couldn't hide our tears. We were at a break point,. as the Bible says, as a fragile glass. We can read in •Revelation 21:4, Queen Valera version (1960): "God will wipe all tears from their eyes; And there will be no more death, no more crying, no crying, no pain; because the first things happened." One more episode had already ended. We missed seeing someone showing compassion and acceptance. ';> 1She gave us her help, although she did not have many resources, so we were very satisfied with how little she was able to do. Very few people had welcomed us - until then - in such a way. She could not stay with us for long; would have been very good for his company, as we had more hours left to wait for the bus. The lady promised she'd be back tomorrow if God wanted to. And so I would do it every day to help other groups of migrants, because they kept arriving every morning at about the same time. But it wasn't more than half a day before we took our route to Mexico,as soon as the buses arrived, we lined up to wait for a call by name to take our places. There were three buses that were to carry about 150 people. As soon as we were all on the bus, the cops performed a check, to see that everything was fine. There were some who didn't pay and those who barely had enough money to do it,There was not a day when we didn't think the authorities or the "coyotes" would abuse rios, because they shouldn't have taken us to a ground transport terminal nail; we could have bought the tickets ourselves, but that didn't have so much because we already wanted to get out of that country and move on to the next,The truck finally got going for. get to the capital, and from there we had to take another to get to the Mexican border. We spent a few hours on the short trip, we couldn't rest because the bus, river. it was very comfortable,During the trip, on the bus we talked about the possibility of living in Mexico and about the option of deportation. They were things we thought about all the time. We couldn't stop having those thoughts. Impossible to stop the mind in circumstances like this. Paulo Coelho said: "The possibility of realized a dream is 1st that makes life interesting". Our mind played a fundamental role in this journey. One definitely had a responsibility to tame thoughts; because it could be helpful to keep your mind free, but not in the difficult and embarrassing circumstances we go through, where if you don't have it tamed, you can lose control and end up crazy. This same author said that when someone wants something they should know that they are taking risks and that's why life is worth it. It didn't matter in the end where it would end, whether in the United States or Mexico; I already felt like a winner just by getting to either of those two places alive. The risk was worth it.

We arrived in the capital of Guatemala at night, close to where migration was. We thought we were going to be able to sleep, but soon we'd continue the route. We just had to do the paperwork and print and photocopy the necessary documents to be there. Everyone told us that with that paper we could stay twenty days in the country—how, how if you were interested in staying one second longer.Therefore we thank you for your hospitality and head to the truck terminal to buy our tickets. When we arrived everything was closed. In Guatemala the bus has no nightlife as in certain countries that we had passed, and we could not buy anything. At the last minute we saw a street vendor selling frying, but the point was that she didn't want to accept dollars. We explained that we were tourists, a story that helped him change his mind. I didn't have much to eat, but that would be enough for us to get to Mexico,As soon as we could we split up to buy our tickets, and the ticket seller wanted to charge us—the very abusive one—twice the price, which we didn't accept and told him we'd wait for someone else to give us the normal price, we were sick of so much abuse and impunity. The price of the trip was ten dollars and he wanted to charge us twenty. What they were unaware of was that we were aware of the prices, almost everything, because those who had already passed had explained to us step by step their experience, costs, prices, everything. We didn't ignore the real cost. So he, realizing that we knew the price, told us to get on the bus,Unfortunately, every country we crossed had its own weaponry of evil; we were ranted, we were charged dearly for food, water, taxis, dollar change, physical, verbal abuse, and yet we were able to continue on our way.At five o'clock in the morning we were arriving at the Guatemala-Mexico border. At this border taxis were bicycles with a cabin that could carry three people maximum. We were told that we could not cross without first going through the Mexican customs to have the visa, that we had to pass over a river and they knew that we could not refuse it, not really we all had a passport. We concentrated on the riverbank, which we had to cross on a raft. Unfortunately everything was charged in dollar, something inconsibly and inexplicable,

Mexico
class-"photo"
>
Rebirth of a new hope
To reach victory is to go through countless trials, struggles, falls, disappointments, pain; no one can say that he has achieved victory if he has not won all this first. We suffer a lot along the way, we suffered myriad afflictions, dismays. Likewise, we suffered injustices, humiliations, altercations, threats, assaults; we passed through the valley of death. That is why I can now say that everyone who came to Mexico is more than grateful to God and to life, because so far we can say ourselves victors,
It is sad to realize that only in need is it when man begins to invoke God, it is curious that we need to suffer some kind of anguish to turn to heaven and cry to God. And it's funny that after you've gone through all those torments and you're now working, in a place to sleep and without going hungry, you'll forget about him again.. Human beings have much evil within themselves, and we are quickly forgotten that we exist because of that infinite goodness of God,
For us it was convenient to arrive during their opening hours, i.e. from 8:00 a.m. M. 12:00 p.m. M. The taxi took us to the city center, from there we walked about four kilometers to reach the migration station. We were lucky that there weren't many people, it was just us, the people in the group,


Carrying out the permit procedure took all day, so we had to stay at the immigration station. Barely a month before, migration was denorating all Haitians, but when we arrived we were giving them leave to stay for a month. If you said you were from the Congo, you were stopped for at least a month. After we were granted permits, we had to look for a place to stay, because buses with routes from Tapachula to the north only departed twice a week, on Wednesdays and on Saturdays. We were able to find Plays where we were accommodated for two or three dollars a night. There were also places where we were not charged anything, but in return we had to hire them their transportation service, since they had trucks heading north, which cost $1200 pesos,We stayed a week to prepare before the trip. Not only to get fresh and clean to Tijuana, but also for our family members to send us more money. In the meantime, we use that time to get a little distracted, go for a walk and meet Tapachula. Every day was the same routine, eating, communicating with family, waiting for the day of departure and sleeping. There were some of the group who had enough money to go their way and went on. However, the rest of us were given the task of raising money until each person in the group had for the trip. In the end, we decided to leave on Saturday at 4:00 p.m. M. We just had ourselves. We had already lived through all those months, so we were becoming a real family; taking care of each other. This was, to say, the last push between everyone to Deny Tijuana and from there everyone would see how to cross to the United States,We went out in two trucks. we were hoping to get to know other places during the trip. The trip would last four days, but was delayed because one of the trucks had engine failed and took half a day to repair. We arrived in Tijuana at four and a half days. Along the way we communicated with friends who had previously refused to know where to go. The first Haitians who had arrived in Tijuana in the months of May, June, July and August had nowhere to stay and settled on the street, next to a place known as Father Chava's Breakfast Bar. The government of Tijuana never imagined that such a large number of foreigners would enter its doors in such a short period of time. Due to the number of Haitians, Africans, Muslims, etc. , which were coming to the right and sinister, was that other organizations such as the religious began to open, as well as their doors to house the number of people who were sleeping on the street.It was not something we could not do, we came from sleeping in the jungle, where you could be devoured, chopped, or die from a wild animal; so sleeping on the street and doing our needs in -- she was no problem. In the life of this city had passed through its streets a black exodus. It was also that Tijuana began to change its physiognomy. We were barbaric, countless. According to calculations by the North Border College, between 15,000 and 20,000 Haitians arrived at this border. The media reported the same. And the ones we stayed in Baja California, in September 2017 we were about 5000.class""photo">src"images/SobrevivSecondHalf-11.jpg"/At first, it was amazing to see migrants lying on the street in front of the dining room of Father Chava. Every time a migrant arrived in the city at the first place the taxi took him was to Father Chava's dining room because there was still no hostel willing to welcome us.Now I know that Tijuana is one of the cities where migrants from different parts of the world arrive the most. Whether it's to use it as a bridge to cross into the United States or, as we did, to settle here,

The first expressions of the Tijuanens when we were seen by their avenues were displeasure, of discontent, of discrimination. It looked like they'd never seen a. They had seen some in isolation, but not so many, and I admit that this was scary. On second thought, if he were in his position, he'd probably think the same thing. I know we didn't look our best at the time. And not all Haitians are good people, nor are all Mexicans. In this exodus, both good and bad came out of Haiti and Brazil,We arrive with a face of extreme tiredness, with a ferocious hunger, with health problems, with strong emotional problems; What we longed for was help! Bath, change and a place to rest for hours, rather than eat. We couldn't hold each other physically anymore,Very, far from what we wanted, what we wanted, was actually consisting of resuming strength, lining up next to Padre Chava's Breakfast, where they rightly installed a module of the Instituto Nacional ele "Migration" (INM), in collaboration with the Municipal Directorate of Attention to the Migrant in charge of the Lic. Rosario Lozada, who very kindly took care of us and sellated us the office of departure from Tapachula, which indicated the date to cross to the United States. And on one side they put a symbol that they couldn't, according to them, clone. Whether it was a circle, a star, a square, a diamond, a clover, all with their respective color, which could vary. This was very ingenious of you, but the Haitian has no limits, we could figure out how to modify everything. One of the things that we developed unfortunately on this journey was knowing how to manipulate the situation and put things in our favor,The INM sought ways to organize the outings jointly with the U.S. government to welcome us. So, the INM usually carried groups of about fifty people per day. In addition, this same institution, with the help of the Beta Group in charge of the Lic. Alejandro Salinas and his team, were the ones who distributed to the people in the hostels that were opening in different parts of the city,I connected with a friend who waited for me at Father Chava's Breakfast and from there directed me to a street called Alacrán Canyon, right where the Ambassadors Temple is located. Jesus. Honestly, I was already desperate and didn't want to go on hold with the assignments and distribution of groups to get to a hostel. In the Ambassadors of Jesus Temple - in charge of Pastor Gustavo Banda Aceves and his wife Zaida Guíííén López - as elsewhere, they were listed as they arrived and that's how they were going;-They gave priority to women with children , pregnant women and the sick to leave early,

The numbers used them not only to have a count of the people they were receiving, it also served to facilitate coordination with the INM in order to take people to the garita, since the groups could easily form them with the allocation of numbers. That way, migrants didn't have to line up to be given a date. I had been told that from there they came to leave up to thirty a day and that most of those who crossed, managed to reach their destination in the United States, which was mostly Florida, where they arrived with a family member or friend. Those who did not have this privilege made contact with a Haitian pastor who could receive them,The Ambassadors of Jesus Temple is a church; however, in the face of this emergency it became a refuge, so it worked in both ways,It was the largest shelter, it could hold up to 600 people. No where else had that capacity. The members of that church, especially the Ortega family, were the ones who were there day after day, distributing the places, providing blankets, personal grooming, handing out clothes, food, etc.The treatment was different, human, respectful, understanding, something we hadn't seen anywhere else except with the lady who felt empathy with us on one of the journeys. Here they would welcome people at any time, outside in the morning, at night or in the early morning. The door was never locked. But even if the door didn't close, many Haitians who just arrived ignored it, so many families who arrived at 2, 3 or 4 at morning and were going out and cold until dawn and offered them a place. Complete families. It was a truly impressive thing,In all the places we were there were countless rules, but there was apparently none here. Everyone else had hours to wake up, eat, bathe, go out, enter; Not here. There were two heavily regulated places; in one of them at five in the morning they would take you out with the cold it was, regardless of whether they were women with children or pregnant women. That was his norm. Moreover, it was not itself a hostel; they gave you breakfast and you had to roam the city until four or five in the afternoon, when they would give you entry again if you reached a place. There was another one who was pure men, where they would still take you out at five in the morning and at six in the afternoon you had to be back, to name a few examples. You understand, those were their rules and we had to respect them,However, in the Ambassadors of Jesus Temple, there was no such thing. You could come in at any time, but at nine o'clock the lights went out and everyone went to sleep. So they were the first few months because the shepherd and her husband worked, so they also had to rest a little. To put it somehow, their workday was continuous and endless, because if someone needed something in the early morning—which' was very common—they had to attend to it. So. who needed to have a break. As an indication of the time to sleep the shepherd sang a song, with which she hinted that we had to turn everything off; He said more or less this: "Until tomorrow, God willing, that you rest well, it was time to go to bed and to dream too, for tomorrow you know another day and you must live it with joy. . . ". It was unusual and very funny. We were laughing at her. Even though she was very strict with people, it turned out to have her crazy times,

However, I was unlucky that when I arrived there was no space. The shepherd told us several that she could no longer with so many and who had to send us elsewhere, so they referred us to the INM, which could only take us to the street in front of Father Chava's Breakfast. This was around eight o'clock at night and, in your luck you had to look for him where veruse, in a hotel or in another hostel. I contacted a friend who was staying near the line, where there were spaces in tents for the night,
"div class"photo">

Alanian Canyon, the Ambassadors of Jesus church, that hostel that received nearly half of Haitian migrants for more than six months. The church had more than five hundred Haitians among men, women, children; everyone was interested in getting there because it was the only shelter in dondoe migration sent ten to thirty people every day, meaning that more people arrived every day than they were leaving. There was always food and it was easy to obtain, but sometimes people spent more than four hours in the bathroom line, before Pastor Gustavo and his beloved wife—who are regarded as the protectors and relatives of Haitians, especially me—enlarged the facilitating the use of migrants. There are still about a hundred people in this hostel, to the point that the church started a project since the end of 2016, which they called Little Haiti.
But because I am a foolish and insistent man, despite not being accepted into the Temple, I returned the next early day to find a space for me again. I knew that in that place people would leave early and reach their destination. God was there, because many who were in that church came with their family or friends. So I insisted and stayed. Besides, I was also trying to be with my friend, who was already in that place,. because we wanted to try to get in together. The idea was to cross over and go to my mother's house, who has lived in Florida for several years,
My arrival in Tijuana was on December 8, 2016. November and December, you can say, were the months when it was easier to enter the United States without being deported. It was like a time of grace. Something happened to Obama, probably because before that he had been declared the american president who had made the most deportations. Many of the Haitians benefited from this sudden change, by which they were given access to that nation,

Some authorities were asking for bribes; they started with $200 and ended up charging 400. Whoever had them, because he paid them to enter before the allotted date. Many, unknowingly, were paying for their deportation. Especially those that passed in the months of September and October. In fact, the "coyotes" also did their job, and I could not mention some quantity, but indeed there were Haitians who took that path; they had no luck. The collections were between five thousand and seven thousand dollars. Half here, half crossing,Those who had their turn to run to U.S. migration offices waited a week, two weeks, or up to a month for the decision to be made to let them into the United States or be deported to Haiti.From the moment we arrived1 in Tijuana, the INM agents explained that they could not give us papers to stay in Mexico. That wasn't really the goal we were pursuing. Some'Haitians thought that the shelters received a lot of money from the government for helping the migrant, and that's why it wasn't in their interest for us to leave those places. For us, they were being benefited by this people. We talked and thought the Mexicans wanted us to stay in town to have black people in it,Surely, as everywhere, several shelters benefited from each government's departure for these matters. But not all of them. We found that elsewhere pastors from other churches that had opened were charging 200 pesos per night. They said it wasn't true, but it was. We knew it ourselves, we had acquaintances everywhere and communicated constantly. Now that I think about it, it was logical, because they had no resources like the places set up for migrant care. Somehow they had to cover the expenses generated by the Haitians. I can understand,In the temple where we were there was no collection; it was a church established as a refuge, where it was the faith of the shepherds that achieved the sustaining of so many people. It was a shelter, say emergency, because they had a way to give us a place to sleep. Then we discovered that the shepherds had a foundation, which was sfama Fundación Regalo Amor, A. C. However, their statutes did not say "migrants", but help disintegrated families and street children. Still, through this foundation it was that help came from the government, but not with the same force as it came to the places of attention to the migrant,

The needs of food, blankets, mats, water and very timely medical days were covered. At one time, countless altruistic groups came to support, such as Los Angeles de Frontera, in Hugo's care. Castr. o. and Gaba Cortés, who are the ones I remember the most. I thank the Tijuan community for standing in solidarity with us by providing all kinds of food, clothing, etc. I was impressed to see how day after day during those months God's blessings came to that place. Food abounded, this was one of the things that fascinated me most, obviously. I also saw the collaboration of the World Organization for Migration (IOM), by Christopher Gascón. They provided the church with tables, chairs, pots of all kinds to cook, knives and an industrial zinc to feed so many people. It really was a valuable help,To be sure, the assistance provided by Migrant Care, the Department of Municipal Social Development, SEDESOL, the San Diego Methodist Church, run by Pastor Elise, the Siloe Mission Foundation, korean physician groups. San Diego, an anonymous altruistic character who lives in Los Angeles, and certainly the Tijuan community,Different churches in the town attended our aid regardless of religion. There I saw Adventists, Baptists, Presbyterians, Catholics participate, and even atheists participated in their valuable collaboration. It was an amazing experience. After a while he joined another institution called Espacio' Migrant, run by Paulina Oivera Cáñez, who was given the task of seeking support from lawyers not only from the city, but from the United States. These supported us with. talks about our rights in Mexico, because they were already seeing that we could hardly all cross and that many of us would get stuck in this country.' Having that information provided to us was very significant to the Haitian people. I'd like to mention to everyone who was involved in this unimaginable work, but I don't remember everyone's names,One thing that struck me a lot was the work done by a young man named Terry and two of his friends; they were given the task of filling the church with mattresses for all. They came all the way from Santa Monica, California - if I remember correctly. How did you do to meet that need, to whom you took so many good mattresses that we were not allowed to go through the cold? His work was very remarkable and I am infinitely grateful for that. It provided us with comfort and rest,Even with all this, many Haitians began to despair at the expectation of a chance to enter the United States. In the Temple sometimes everything was out of control with the exits; it was very difficult to control so many people and everyone wanting to go, even if it didn't take them a turn. Sometimes we'd calm down, sometimes we wouldn't,THE INM already knew that membership of the United States for Haitians was going to become complicated and was aware of the number of deportees; so it made sense to be presented with the option - right now - to stay here on a visa for humanitarian reasons. This option wasn't what we would have wanted, but it was what we had on the table to drink. Some, seeing that things became difficult, having suffered so much, inexplicably made the decision to be returned to Brazil or Haiti, so the government made things easier for them for their journey,

Others like me have decided to stay in Tijuana. It was not an easy decision, especially because of the effort and support that our relatives had given us to make this trip in order to arrive with our families based in the United States, with the expectation that already being there we would reward them with our work. Most acquired debts in Haiti with the bank, with their friends, with their family, or sold what little they had in order to pursue the "American dream". What a false illusion. After all this, coming back wasn't a fair thing,In the end, I can say that it was a decision that God made, which compared to what would await us in America, was the best. I have friends who are still in prison in some U.S. prison. But it's not the first time waiting to be deported, and others already in Haiti. Sadly, most of them did not live in Haiti. Some didn't even have relatives there. They had been raised in Brazil, the Dominican Republic or Chile; I don't even want to imagine the triple suffering they experienced when they got there, to a country they didn't know, know where and know with whom. The first suffering was caused by leaving his place of origin and leaving everything to bet on nothing; the second, to arrive in a border town, not know anyone and seek their survival; and the third, to spend months in jail without being criminals, just for the simple fact of wanting to have a better life; living with real criminals and suffering again cold and hungry,In my case, I was hoping I could make more money than I was making in Brazil. About 1300 reais, which would be like $300, was paid there. But I found that here in Mexico that payment is a week or a fortnight, wonderful. I realized that money here in Mexico is not that important; you can eat well with little money. You can work and'rest in the afternoon or work at night and rest in the morning. In America I wouldn't have the peace i've had to live in Mexico. I know there are people who must have up to three jobs to be able to sustain themselves. Besides, there's no racism to the same degree here as in America, we feel the respect of most people. I appreciated the advantage that here, seeing that we would not cross paths and that this was no longer an option, we found a way to work without papers and without any problem,As of January 10, 2017, you could no longer enter the United States. Only pregnant women and children had a chance, and yet many were deported, sadly a few days away from giving birth and ended up giving birth in Haiti. So staying was the only real option for about 5000 Haitians living in Baja California. Today, the figure has declined because many requested his return; According to the information provided to me by the INM, we are tentatively here between 2500 and 3000.

My perception of borders

Brazil

We know that, around the world, border trade is one of the economic forces that each country shares with its neighboring country, but some of them cannot benefit from this opportunity due to lack of production. This is the case in the Americas, -generating poverty in many countries!

"Most countries" in the Americas are connected by their borders, however, this does not prevent them from having major economic deficiencies.To begin this study, I crossed several countries and took the time to see that some exchanges are done in particular ways. Thus, Brazil is the only country that shares a border with France through the Guyana department. The only two Countries in South America that do not share a border with Brazil are Ecuador and Chile.We have not been able to visit all the borders shared by Brazil, but we carried out a visual study of the border trade between Bolivia and Brazil. These countries have very different imports in South America. Brazil is the most powerful distributor of agriculture in this region and Boiivia is one of the poorest countries in South America. This border has become increasingly unsafe due to the exchange of cocaine being carried out by distributors in those states. But clearly Brazil has always had its way of progressing due to its livestock rearing and agriculture, which are very powerful exchanges between them. However, this exchange seems to be more or less unique because Bolivia has almost nothing to offer Brazil except immigrants. Brazil is also known as a country that opens its doors and welcomes immigrants, as well as being considered a superpower. Despite his Fall of the World Cup, Brazil remains the leader-in South America.The border between Brasia fencing and Peru is one of the most peaceful borders because trade does not take place in the same way as in Guyana (province of the French metropolis). There are fewer drugs between Brazil and Peru. Peruvians use that border to get in and work because in Brazil work is easier when compared to south american countries. Brazil is a-place where anyone can get papers quickly and easily. 'Peru-EcuadorOn the border between Peru and Ecuador, the economic atmosphere is managed by a very active market. In almost every frontier studied, unfortunately, prostitution is one of the most widespread trades. This is well known,Both countries have different currencies, Ecuador handles the US dollar, which still pushes a very large exchange with Peru. This undoubtedly gives a way of way for drug traffickers and human traffickers who have made it even easier for immigrants from Brazil, Venezuela and Chile to cross the border.Ecuador-ColombiaColombia is known as one of the world's leading cocaine-producing countries. On their shared border with Ecuador, for example, they used the mountains near the border to transport any kind of illegal stuff. The immigrants knew some of these roads because not everyone could go directly, so there were crossroads to go through. The houses there had an alarm system. So crime at the border was more popular than peace,Colombia-PanamaIn fact, there is no border between Colombia and Panama, among them there is a forest called Darien Gap, which has the highest average of traffickers circulating their drugs. In general, these two countries do not share love with each other and there is only one possible passage to travel from Colombia to Panama, it is by air, because there is no other way to go, unless you decide to cross the entire forest that is about 160 km long. Immigrants use this dangerous path to cross and enter Panama's soil (more details in the book).

Panama-Costa RicaAcross all borders, the drug is very poorly controlled by the authorities because young people are smarter than them. On the border between Panama and Costa Rica, the sale of marijuana is very popular. Give more work to the police, however, as something contradictory, peace reigns across the border,The populations of both territories are able to transit and return without any problem, which facilitates much more the wide circulation of drugs. It's. which turns out to be very favorable for all these kinds of unscrupulous people who come and go as they please,Costa Rica-NicaraguaUnfortunately it is the least nice place, the people are not very friendly. The basis of its border is customs, because Costa Rica does not engage in any kind of relationship with its neighbor in the form of a market, as seen on other borders. For a Nicaraguan it is mandatory to cross Costa Rican soil on a visa, because these two countries do not have the same economic level. Here things are handled differently, the Nicaraguan living in Costa Rica must have a green card, otherwise he will be deported. That's how easy,The only trade allowed in which you don't need documents is the prostitution market!Nicaragua-HondurasNo one can describe the situation on the Nicaragua-Honduran border, due to the way nicaragua is crossed. Very few know what the realidat frontera is like, because it is one of the territories that is not analyzed, not only because it is illegal to cross it, but also it was not accepted that immigrants would put ' foot in their soils without having a visa.Honduras-GuatemalaIt is the quietest border we crossed because commercial activity was quite weak compared to other frontiers that we were able to cross. The main objective of the trip was not to analyze the borders, but I - who I am very observant - took it as part of my experience from the beginning to the end, every little detail mattered,Guatemala-MexicoMexico is the first country in North America when it is reached through Central America. Guatemala is very open with Mexico—if you take into account what the process of crossing the border was like—but the economic activities of the two countries share a very rich border trade, especially coffee. There was no great novelty compared to the other borders we had crossed, it was almost the same, but on a larger scale,

Mexico-U.S


The U.S.-Mexico border spans about 3,200 kilometers, stretching from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific Ocean. Dubbed "the omelette of the border," it is the busiest border in the world, with 181 million people crossing the entire shared border with the United States of America (2015).However, between 2016 and 2017 the immigrants took two routes to cross through Baja California, which made it easier for them to reach their destination. This fact gave us a little more time to do a broader study on the borders, particularly that of Tijuana,This border town plays a very role. important in Mexico's economy. It is one of the cities most sought after by immigrants; there is easy access, aj sex and drugs, which is why Americans are very much counted, in addition to their rich cuisine and culture,Crime in this region is stronger than the armed forces, but this does not prevent the population from being happy. The heart of the city is Revolution Street of Happy Tijuana. Craftsmen and artists play a very important role in the image of the city. The economy of this border is dynamic, it can be said that a little peaceful; but effective,RealityI wonder sometimes: what are we really afraid of? To die, to hell, to sickness or to failure? We know that there is no need to worry about failures, but about wasted opportunities. In life one has two choices and both are acceptable: to take responsibility for our lives and to do our best with our possibilities in order to hunt the darkness; or leave you. guide-by your will, your own, with which you will never remain in darkness. Because a fish inside a well can't know the ocean. "Do not admit that your misery is already written, that this is your destiny; our destiny is chosen by everyone. We have a pencil and a draft, and we have to know how-to use them for fairer causes, but they won't be there every day. We have all made sacrifices in life because of money, sacrifices we never make for love. Learn that we are human, that we have a heart and that we only have to place our hands. on top of it to feel a heartbeat that tells you you're alive. That heart is your home, to which you will stop entering the love of God, who will dwell there and replace hatred and the devil. One chooses every day what is best, good and fair. It is enough to cleanse our hearts to be able to see all the riches we have, prosperity, the future and our dreams,Stop looking restless at the places you can see, control your surroundings, and focus on opportunities. Make them, one after the other, and let your will and your inner peace make good decisions. Don't say you don't have enough time, that it's best to shorten, take a quick alternative. Don't let people think about you, make your own decisions. Give its importance to every minor detail, so you don't pay for greater consequences. You must find enough patience and perseverance. The P. A.U. A: Patience, Love, Union, and Respect. And don't be a slave to your own goals; always try to have a plan B. Don't give up on what you fought for just because it didn't go all the way you wanted or expected,After all, things don't depend on a person or money; your happiness depends on the love you have in your heart. Learn to have confidence in you and you will see that everything you can do, since that will feed you,
